# 200 Survey Soil Prep Step-by-Step Instructions

version 2015

**A. Processing Bulk Density Soils (2 inch core)**

1. Record height of soil in core tube (in cm) from the bottom up. Leave caps on. Blue cap is bottom, red is top. Measure 2 opposite sides and take the average. Record site and location info. 
2. Wearing nitrile gloves use large wooden dowel to carefully remove red cap. If soil is loose, use dowel to loosen cap, then twist off with your hand holding core tube upright to prevent spillage.
3. Tare large aluminum tray on the 12kg balance (the big one). Empty contents of core tube into tray and record weight. If contents don’t readily empty from core tube, you will have to scoop out soil with a spatula, or try pushing out with large dowel. Tapping the side of the core tube with the large dowel sometimes dislodges the core.
4. After weighing, carefully dump soil from large tray into small aluminum baking pan. Take the taped label off the core tube and stick it firmly on the pan for identification. Let the pan + soil sit at room temp for 1 week.

**After one week:**

1. Empty contents of small baking pan into 2mm sieve and sieve by shaking side-to-side. Use large rubber stopper to break up large soil chunks and force them thru sieve. If the chunks are too hard to break up with stopper, you will have to use the large mortar and pestle. Empty soil into mortar and pound large soil chunks with pestle to break them down. Use a circular motion to grind them further if necessary. The object here is to loosen soil stuck to the stones. DO NOT grind stones to powder! Pick out any veg matter (roots, twigs, grass, leaves) with tweezers and set aside. Empty contents from mortar into 2mm sieve and re-sieve. Repeat as necessary until only stones greater than 2mm are left in the sieve.
2. Empty stones into a large aluminum tray that has been tared on the 12kg balance and record weight. Discard. Empty contents of receiving pan (the stuff that went thru the sieve – this is less than 2mm and is considered soil) into tared tray on 12kg balance and record weight. Weigh veg matter on the small 3100g balance and record, then discard. The stone and soil weights will be used to calculate bulk density.
3. Tare a small aluminum weighing pan on the 3100g balance and record weight. Put subsample of sieved soil (about 3 spatula scoops) into weighing pan and re-weigh. Record weight. Put pan + soil into 60 deg C oven for 48 hours. After 48 hours, remove pan + soil from oven and let cool 30 minutes. Then weigh again on 3100g balance. Record weight. Then place pan + soil into 105 deg C oven for 24 hours. After 24 hours, remove pan + soil from oven and let cool 30 minutes. Re-weigh and record weight. These data will be used to calculate moisture content.
4. After subsampling for moisture content, empty soil in small aluminum tray in labeled quart-size Ziploc bag. Store in sweater box. This is the bulk density soil sample that will be used for texture analysis

**B. Processing 1 inch Core Samples (for chemical analyses)**

1. Each site will have 4 cores. For each core, record height of soil in core tube (in cm) from the bottom up. Blue cap is bottom, red is top. If necessary measure 2 opposite sides and take the average. Record site and location info.
2. Separate core into 2 segments: top (0-10cm) and bottom (10cm-bottom of core). Do this as follows: wearing nitrile gloves, use the wooden dowel with the 10cm mark to extrude the core into a labeled quart-size Ziploc bag. Extrude up to the 10cm mark, separate the core, then extrude the remaining core into another labeled Ziploc bag. If core does not extrude easily or at all, and unfortunately most won’t, mark the 10 cm location on the core tube with a piece of tape. Use a plastic spatula to scoop the top core segment into a plastic weighing pan, then dump the contents of the pan into the Ziploc bag. Empty the bottom core segment into the other bag. Several taps on the core tube with the dowel is usually sufficient to dislodge the core. If the core is very moist, it may not slide out, and you will have to use a plastic spatula to scoop it out. A combination of scooping and tapping will eventually get it out. If the core is particularly dry and loose, leave the bottom cap on to prevent spills.
3. Once the core has been separated into 2 bags, tare the 12kg balance with an empty Ziploc bag, then weigh both top and bottom bags and record the fresh weight.
4. Wearing nitrile gloves, homogenize the soil in each bag by breaking up core chunks with your hand. If there is a lot of material in the bag, transfer it to a gallon-size Ziploc for homogenizing, then back to the quart-size bag. If the core chunks are difficult to break up with your hands, pounding them with the pestle makes this task much easier.
5. Sieve soil in each bag using 2mm sieve. Use large rubber stopper to break up soil chunks and force them thru sieve. Place soil in receiving pan back in bag and discard material greater than 2mm. You may not be able to sieve soil that is too moist. In this case, homogenize the soil as best as you can, taking care to remove as many stones as possible, along with roots, twigs, and other veg matter.
6. Tare a small aluminum weighing pan on the 3100g balance and record weight. Put subsample of sieved soil into weighing pan and re-weigh. Record weight. Put pan + soil into 60 deg C oven for 48 hours. After 48 hours, remove pan + soil from oven and let cool 30 minutes. Then weigh again on 3100g balance. Record weight. Then place pan + soil into 550 deg C muffle furnace for 2 hours. Use the one in GWC 677 (Goldwater Environmental Lab). After 2 hours, shut off furnace and open the door a crack, and leave soil to cool until the following day. Remove pan + soil from furnace and place in 60 deg C oven for 48 hours. After 48 hours, remove pan + soil from oven and let cool 30 minutes. Re-weigh and record weight. These data will be used to calculate moisture and organic matter content.
7. Take all empty core tubes and caps to the sink and wash with tap water. Scrub the insides of the core tubes with a test tube brush. This task is easier if you let the tubes and caps soak in a sweater box filled with water placed in the sink. Do not remove this box, as it is used as a sediment trap to keep the drain from clogging with soil.
8. Store processed soils in the cold room.
